RESE ARCH E TRACTION
AUTHORS
ELECTRIC TORQUE VECTORING
FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLES
DIPL.-ING.
BERNHARD KNAUDER
is Senior Researcher in
the Area Electrics/
Electronics and Software
at the Virtual Vehicle
Research Center
in Graz (Austria).
The project E-Vectoorc (Electric Vehicle Control of Individual Wheel Torque for On-
and Off-Road Conditions) targets the development of an integrated controller for vehi-
cle dynamics and energy efficiency for fully electric vehicles with one to four electric
motors. The project is funded within the 7th European Union Framework Programme
and unites two OEMs (Jaguar Land Rover, Skoda Auto), one supplier (TRW), two
SMEs (Inverto and Virtual Vehicle), three research centres (CIDAUT, ITA and Flanders
Drive) and two universities (Ilmenau University of Technology and University of Surrey,
project coordinator) from six European countries.
DIPL.-ING.
DZMITRY SAVITSKI
is Scientific Researcher at
the Department of
Mechanical Engineering at
Ilmenau University of
Technology (Germany).
JOHAN THEUNISSEN
is Senior Researcher in
the research domains
Clean and Energy Efficient
Vehicles and Intelligent
Driver and Traffic Systems
at Flanders Drive in
Lommel (Belgium).
DR. LEONARDO
DE NOVELLIS
is Research Fellow in
Vehicle Dynamics at the
University of Surrey
(United Kingdom).
50
1 TORQUE VEC TORING
2 UNDERSTEER CHAR AC TERISTIC S
3 E-VEC TO ORC C ONTROL STRUC TURE
4 DYNAMIC YAW C ONTROLLER
5 WHEEL SLIP C ONTROLLER
6 IN -VEHICLE TESTING
7 C ONCLUSIONS
1 TORQUE VECTORING
❶ Protoype with four individually driven wheels
using the Range Rover Evoque
For the automotive industry, torque vectoring (TV) is a modern
concept to enhance driving stability and safety whilst improving
vehicle dynamics or the fun-to-drive. TV offers the capability of
individual wheel torque distribution and has a direct impact on the
vehicle’s yaw moment. In conventional powertrain architectures,
vehicle stability control is typically based on friction brakes,
whereas TV differentials are rare because of their complexity and
– as a result – higher costs. Electric vehicle architectures with
individual wheel propulsion devices on the other allow for selec-
tive torque distribution. Next to the positive vehicle handling and
safety features of torque vectoring an efficient operation is required
to extend the operational range of the electric vehicle.
The central functions of the E-Vectoorc controller are a dynamic
yaw controller (DYC), a wheel slip controller and an energy coor-
dinator. The functionality is verified both by simulations and exper-
imentally. For the in-vehicle tests an electrified Range Rover
Evoque, ➊ and ➋, comprising four individually driven wheels and
an electro-hydraulic braking system was developed. A Skoda Yeti
equipped with high-tech measuring equipment serves as measur-
ing data source for detailed functional performance analyses of
conventional electronic stability programs (ESP).
2 UNDERSTEER CHARACTERISTICS
The steady-state cornering response of a vehicle is typically de -
fined by its so-called understeer characteristic, which defines the
relation between steering wheel angle and lateral acceleration [1].
Conservative vehicle designs show a high understeer gradient (i.e.
high steering wheel angle for high lateral acceleration) and a lim-
ited maximum lateral acceleration. Sports cars, on the other hand,
have lower gradients (low steering wheel angle for high lateral
acceleration) and a higher maximum lateral acceleration and there-
fore “feel” more agile. Torque vectoring can be used to dynami-
cally influence the understeer characteristic of the vehicle and, as
such, improve the driver’s experience. When implemented in elec-
tric powertrains, a static or dynamic adaptation of the vehicle char-
acteristics can be realised rather straightforwardly because of the
flexibility of electric propulsion systems.
The plots in ❸ report examples of understeer characteristics
for different vehicle configurations and front-to-rear torque
distributions.
❷ Integration of the electric powertrain in the rear axis of the Range Rover Evoque
04I2014 Volume 9
51
RESE ARCH E TRACTION
a
x
= 0 m/s2
a
x
= 3 m/s2
60
60
40
δdyn [°]
4WD (50-50)
FWD
RWD
4WD (75-25)
4WD (25-75)
40
δdyn [°]
20
20
0
0
0 2 4 6 8 10
a
y [m/s2]
0 2 4 6 8 10
a
y [m/s2]
❸ Understeer characteristics (derived from the quasi-static model) for different vehicle configurations
For constant velocities (a_x=0 m/s2) the cornering performance
for all five variants is quite similar. In accelerated vehicle opera-
tions (e.g. a_x=3 m/s2 constant acceleration), differences in the
characteristics are visible. The front-wheel drive (FWD) vehicle
already tends to understeer with low lateral acceleration values
which makes it the most conservative vehicle within this range.
The rear-wheel drive (RWD) vehicle on the other hand shows less
understeering until the vehicle at approx. a_y=6 m/s2 loses its
stability and spins. Four-wheel drive vehicles are situated in
between these two extremes. A front-to-rear torque distribution of
25 to 75 % marks the most agile vehicle in this analysis offering
good vehicle stability properties.
3 E-VECTOORC CONTROL STRUCTURE
➍ shows the structure of the E-Vectoorc controller is presented.
Torque requests for the electric motor units and brake pressure
values for the friction brake system represent the outputs of this
controller. A torque distribution unit coordinates the allocation of
these demands.
It considers the requests from different vehicle functions such
as individual wheel torque demand values, overall system state
information and inputs from the energy coordinator. The control
loop closes over various sensor data collected in the input block,
which also recognises the driver’s inputs.
As the E-Vectoorc control structure has been developed to apply
to various vehicle classes comprising different powertrain configu-
rations, a simulation-based verification is carried out. ❺ depicts
seven case study vehicle configurations that were considered dur-
ing the control function verification.
The electrified Range Rover Evoque is represented by case study
“2” with four individually driven wheels. This architecture repre-
sents the most flexible one and enables the display of various pow-
ertrain configurations by simply changing the torque allocation
❹ E-Vectoorc control structure
52
CASE STUDY 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
SEGMENT J J B B D D D
LAYOUT FWD 4WD FWD 4WD FWD RWD 4WD
TORQUE
VECTORING
Axle 1: ❑ ✓
Axle 2: –
Axle 1: ❑ ✓
Axle 2: ❑ ✓
Axle 1: ❑ ✓
Axle 2: –
Axle 1: ❑ ✓
Axle 2: ❑ ✓
Axle 1: ❑ ✓
Axle 2: –
Axle 1: –
Axle 2: ❑ ✓
Axle 1: ❑ ✗
Axle 2: ❑ ✓
❺ Electric drivetrain layouts for case study analysis of DYC system
strategy in the E-Vectoorc controller accordingly. In the study, sev-
eral architectures such as FWD, RWD and 4WD were considered
both in small (B – “3, 4”) and large (D – “5-7”) cars and in SUVs
(J – “1, 2”) (according to the Euro Market Segments [2]). Also TV
transmission stages were considered in this simulation study for
central motor driven vehicles (“4”). This selection is adjusted to
large-scale production vehicles with reasonable cost effort. The
electric powertrains have been fitted into the vehicle models
according to the performance data of the reference series variants
comprising internal combustion engines and not supporting torque
vectoring.
a constant vehicle velocity of 90 km/h in terms of yaw rate and
sideslip angle.
In the first four steering steps both the baseline vehicle without
TV and the controlled version (DYC active) offer acceptable stabil-
ity properties. The TV vehicle shows increased agility because of
the fast tracking of the reference yaw characteristics. After steer-
ing step number five the baseline vehicle starts losing its stability
as is indicated by the overshoots in the yaw rate and sideslip angle
values. While the controlled vehicle is able to track the reference
yaw moment (ensuring stable driving behaviour) up to the end of
the manoeuvre, the baseline vehicle cannot properly follow up on
the last four steering inputs. This example demonstrates the ben-
eficial effect of the DYC system compared to the baseline vehicle
without TV.
4 DYNAMIC YAW CONTROLLER
The torque vectoring based dynamic yaw control function consists
of a feedforward and a feedback part [3]. The feedforward contri-
bution of the reference yaw moment is based on the driver’s inputs
and the estimated vehicle states. The feedback part compensates
the inaccuracies, disturbances or variations of the vehicle param-
eters that were used for establishing the reference values. For the
off-line generation of the feedforward reference yaw moment a
quasi-static vehicle model is used.
❻ shows the simulation result of a manoeuvre consisting of a
sequence of steering steps at increasing steering amplitudes for
5 WHEEL SLIP CONTROLLER
Electric powertrains offer considerable potential in terms of lon-
gitudinal vehicle performance. With continuous wheel slip control
mechanisms, significant improvements can be realised in anti-lock
braking (ABS) and traction control (TC) situations. The imple-
mented brake control function realises pure friction, pure electric,
blended and ABS braking modes applied to the electro-hydraulic
brake system and the electric motor units. During road tests on a
r [°/s]
β [°/s]
50
0
-50
20
10
0
-10
-20
Reference
B
DYC active
40 45 50 55 60 65
Baseline
DYC active
40 45 50 55 60 65
t [s]
❻ Vehicle yaw rate r(t) and sideslip angle β(t)
during a sequence of step steers
04I2014 Volume 9
53
RESE ARCH E TRACTION
90
Sport mode
Normal mode
80
70
δ [°]
60
50
40
30
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
a
y [m/s2]
❼ Experimental understeer charac-
teristics for the 2WD torque-vectoring
controlled E Vectoorc vehicle demon-
strator in sports and normal driving
modes
ow- µ surface the application of the direct slip control resulted in
a brake distance reduction of up to 28.8 % compared to braking
without ABS and of 14.6 % compared to braking with standard
ABS utilising only the friction brake system.
6 IN-VEHICLE TESTING
The proof of concept is achieved through vehicle tests with the
Range Rover Evoque performed at the Lommel proving ground
(Belgium). The visual of this article shows the vehicle equipped
for vehicle dynamics tests. Its modular concept consists of two
identical powertrain units, each containing two electric motors.
One of these units is installed at the front and one at the rear axle
of the vehicle. Via single-speed, two-stage reduction boxes the
switched reluctance (SR) motor units are connected over the half-
shafts to the wheels. The benefits of using SR motors for automo-
tive applications are their robust performance, a long constant
power region and high speed operation. The absence of permanent
magnets makes the SR motor more cost-effective. The energy for
the powertrain is provided by a 600 V battery pack with a capac-
ity of 9 kWh feeding 3-phase inverter units. The test vehicle com-
prising four electric motors offers a total system power of 140 kW
(400 kW peak for max. 30 s) and a total torque of 320 Nm torque
(800 Nm peak for max. 30 s).
The E-Vectoorc structure is implemented as a chassis controller
incorporating control functions with regard to basic drivability,
energy and system management, dynamic yaw control, wheel slip
control, torque distribution via control allocation and a brake
blending strategy.
Considering the hazards that may arise in electric powertrains
and their controllers, a functional safety concept according to ISO
26262 [4] is elaborated. Resulting measures such as feasibility
checks in the torque actuation path are integrated into the E-Vec-
toorc controller structure to ensure safe vehicle operation.
❽ HiL test
54
❼ depicts the results from an experimental verification of the
DYC in vehicle tests for 2WD torque vectoring [5].
The plot displays the understeer characteristics for the “nor-
mal” and “sports” controller parameters, including the measure-
ment error bars. In both cases a successful implementation of the
reference characteristics could be realised. In various manoeuvres
such as step steering, sinus steering input, straight driving, ramp
steering, etc. during braking, constant velocity and acceleration
the performance of the E-Vectoorc control system was verified.
REFERENCES
[1] Gillespie, T. D.: Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics. Society of Automotive
Engineers, Inc., Warrendale, PA, 1992. pp. 226-230
[2] Commission of the European communities, Case No COMP/M.1406 –
Hyundai / KIA, Regulation (EEC), No. 4064/89, 1999. Download under: ec.
europa.eu/competition/mergers/cases/decisions//m 1406 en.pdf
[3] De Novellis, L.; Sorniotti, A.; Gruber, P.; Pennycott, A.: Comparison of
Feedback Control Techniques for Torque-Vectoring Control of Fully Electric Vehi-
cles. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2014, DOI: 10.1109/
TVT.2014.2305475
[4] ISO26262:2011(en) – Road vehicles – Functional safety: International
Organisation for Standardisation, 2011
[5] Pennycott, A.; De Novellis, L.; Sorniotti, A.; Gruber, P.: The Application of
Control and Wheel Torque Allocation Techniques to Driving Modes for Fully
Electric Vehicles. SAE International Journal of Passenger Cars – Mechanical
Systems, 2014, 7 (2), 2014, DOI: 10.4271/2014-01-0085
7 CONCLUSIONS
As the torque vectoring functionality can be easily integrated into
electric vehicles with individual wheel propulsion, the presented
work launches a vehicle dynamics control system capable of being
integrated into various vehicle configurations. Verifications in sim-
ulation studies and in vehicle tests, eg. ➑, confirm first of all the
effectiveness of the control system and secondly the applicability
to various vehicle architectures in terms of improved vehicle sta-
bility. A reduction of the stopping distance in emergency braking
situations is achieved because of the proportional-integral direct
wheel slip control mechanism, which enables smooth tracking of
the reference slip value. In terms of functional safety, a concept
according to ISO 26262 was included in the development process
to provide for the required system safety.
The successful integration of the E-Vectoorc concept demon-
strates the possibility to realise safe electric vehicles with an
increased fun-to-drive factor resulting in major benefits to the
customers.
THANKS
The research leading to these results received funding from the European
Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agree-
ment n° 284708. A special word of thanks goes to the project leader Dr.
Aldo Sorniotti (University of Surrey), Dr. Josef Zehetner (Virtual Vehicle
Research Center) and all participating partners within the consortium.
04I2014 Volume 9
55
